Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the functional anatomy of the kidney and renal blood flow.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin renal physiology. Outline the functions of the kidney and its
functional anatomy.
The kidney has a range of functions centred on the regulation of the internal
environment, and its anatomy is exquisitely adapted to them.
Its functions are: the excretion of the waste products of metabolism,
such as urea and creatinine, and of foreign substances;
the regulation of the water and electrolyte balance and so of the volume and
composition of the body fluids; the regulation of the acid-base balance;
the regulation of the arterial blood pressure,
over the long term through volume and through the renin-angiotensin system;
and endocrine functions — the production of erythropoietin,
the activation of vitamin D, and the secretion of renin.
The functional unit is the nephron, of which there are about a million per kidney,
each comprising a glomerulus, where filtration occurs,
and a long tubule — the proximal tubule, the loop of Henle,
the distal tubule and the collecting duct — where the filtrate is processed.
The nephrons are arranged with their glomeruli and convoluted tubules in the cortex
and their loops dipping into the medulla,
the cortical and the juxtamedullary nephrons differing in the depth of their loops.
So the kidney excretes wastes, regulates the water,
electrolyte and acid-base balance and the blood pressure,
and has endocrine functions; its functional unit being the nephron — a glomerulus
for filtration and a tubule for processing — arranged through the cortex and
medulla, an anatomy adapted to the formation and processing of urine.
Describe the renal blood supply and its unusual arrangement.
The renal circulation is remarkable both for its very large flow and for its unique
arrangement of two capillary beds in series,
adapted to the kidney's task of filtering the plasma.
The kidneys receive a very large blood flow — about a fifth to a quarter of the
cardiac output, some twelve hundred millilitres a minute — far in excess of their
metabolic needs, because the flow serves filtration rather than oxygen supply.
The blood reaches each glomerulus through an afferent arteriole and leaves through
an efferent arteriole, an arrangement unique in having an arteriole,
rather than a venule, downstream of a capillary bed.
The first capillary bed is the high-pressure glomerular capillary,
where filtration occurs; the blood then passes through the efferent arteriole into
the second bed, the low-pressure peritubular capillaries surrounding the cortical
tubules, and, for the juxtamedullary nephrons,
the vasa recta descending into the medulla, where reabsorption occurs.
The two arterioles, by their adjustable resistance,
control the pressures in the glomerulus and so the filtration.
So the renal circulation receives a fifth to a quarter of the cardiac output,
far beyond its metabolic need, arranged uniquely with two capillary beds in series
— the high-pressure glomerular for filtration and the low-pressure peritubular and
vasa recta for reabsorption — separated by the efferent arteriole,
whose resistance, with the afferent, controls glomerular filtration.
Describe the magnitude and distribution of renal blood flow.
The renal blood flow is not only large but unevenly distributed within the kidney,
the distribution being important for both function and vulnerability.
The total renal blood flow is around twelve hundred millilitres a minute,
a fifth to a quarter of the cardiac output; expressed as plasma,
the renal plasma flow is around six hundred millilitres a minute.
Within the kidney, the flow is distributed very unevenly between the cortex and the
medulla: the cortex, containing the glomeruli,
receives the great majority of the flow — a high flow suited to filtration;
the medulla receives only a small fraction, perhaps a few per cent,
and the inner medulla less still.
This low medullary flow is necessary to preserve the medullary concentration
gradient, which a high flow would wash out, but it has a consequence: the medulla,
with its low blood flow and high metabolic demand from the active transport in the
loop of Henle, operates at a low oxygen tension, on the edge of hypoxia,
making it particularly vulnerable to ischaemic injury.
So the renal blood flow is large, around twelve hundred millilitres a minute,
but unevenly distributed — the cortex receiving most, suited to filtration,
and the medulla only a small fraction,
necessary to preserve its concentration gradient but leaving it on the edge of
hypoxia and vulnerable to ischaemic injury — a distribution central to renal
function and to acute kidney injury.
Describe the autoregulation of renal blood flow and glomerular filtration.
The renal blood flow and the glomerular filtration rate are held remarkably
constant over a wide range of arterial pressures by autoregulation,
which protects the filtration from fluctuations in blood pressure,
and which operates by two intrinsic mechanisms.
If renal blood flow and filtration are plotted against the mean arterial pressure,
both are seen to remain nearly constant over a wide range — from around eighty to a
hundred and eighty millimetres of mercury — the curve forming a plateau,
falling only outside these limits.
Two mechanisms achieve this, both acting on the afferent arteriole.
The myogenic mechanism is the intrinsic response of the arteriolar smooth muscle to
stretch: a rise in pressure stretches the afferent arteriole,
which responds by constricting, increasing its resistance and so keeping the flow
and the glomerular pressure constant.
The tubuloglomerular feedback is a mechanism by which the composition of the fluid
in the tubule feeds back to control the arteriole: the macula densa,
sensing the sodium chloride delivery,
adjusts the afferent arteriolar tone to stabilise the filtration.
So renal blood flow and glomerular filtration are autoregulated,
held nearly constant over a mean arterial pressure of about eighty to a hundred and
eighty millimetres of mercury, by the myogenic constriction of the afferent
arteriole to a rise in pressure and by tubuloglomerular feedback from the macula
densa — protecting the filtration against fluctuations in blood pressure,
an autoregulation important in health and lost in severe hypotension.
Describe the juxtaglomerular apparatus.
The juxtaglomerular apparatus is a specialised structure at the point where the
distal tubule of a nephron returns to lie against its own glomerulus,
and it is the key sensing and control structure linking the tubule,
the arterioles and the systemic regulation of blood pressure.
It comprises three components. The macula densa is a plaque of specialised cells of
the distal tubule, at the point where it contacts the glomerulus,
which sense the sodium chloride concentration of the tubular fluid passing them.
The juxtaglomerular cells are specialised,
modified smooth muscle cells in the wall of the afferent arteriole,
which synthesise, store and secrete the enzyme renin,
and which also act as stretch receptors sensing the arteriolar pressure.
The extraglomerular mesangial cells lie between them.
Through this apparatus, two important functions occur: tubuloglomerular feedback,
by which the macula densa adjusts the afferent arteriolar tone to stabilise
filtration; and the control of renin secretion,
which the juxtaglomerular cells release in response to a low arteriolar pressure,
a low sodium delivery sensed by the macula densa, and sympathetic stimulation.
So the juxtaglomerular apparatus, where the distal tubule meets its glomerulus,
comprises the macula densa sensing tubular sodium chloride,
the renin-secreting juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole sensing
pressure, and the mesangial cells; mediating tubuloglomerular feedback and the
control of renin secretion — a structure central to the regulation of filtration
and of blood pressure.
How is renal blood flow measured?
The renal blood flow can be measured by applying the clearance principle,
using a substance that is almost completely removed from the blood in a single
passage through the kidney, and the classic method uses para-aminohippuric acid,
illustrating the Fick principle applied to the kidney.
The principle is as follows.
Para-aminohippuric acid is a substance that is both filtered and actively secreted
by the renal tubules, so that at low plasma concentrations it is almost completely
cleared from the plasma in a single passage through the kidney — nearly all of it
appearing in the urine.
By the Fick principle, the amount entering the kidney in the plasma equals the
amount leaving in the urine plus that remaining in the renal venous blood;
since almost none remains, the renal plasma flow can be calculated as the rate of
excretion of the substance divided by its concentration in the arterial plasma — in
effect, its clearance gives the renal plasma flow.
This gives the effective renal plasma flow,
and dividing by one minus the haematocrit converts plasma flow to blood flow.
So renal blood flow is measured by the clearance of para-aminohippuric acid, which,
being almost completely cleared in one passage,
has a clearance equal to the renal plasma flow by the Fick principle — its
excretion rate divided by its arterial concentration;
the plasma flow then converted to blood flow using the haematocrit — the classic
measurement of renal perfusion.
Describe the neural and hormonal regulation of renal blood flow,
and its relevance to anaesthesia.
Although renal blood flow is autoregulated,
it is also subject to neural and hormonal influences that can override
autoregulation, particularly in stress and in the perioperative period,
with important consequences for the kidney.
The sympathetic nervous system innervates the renal vasculature;
at rest its tone is low, but in states of stress — such as haemorrhage,
hypovolaemia, severe exercise and the stress response to surgery — increased
sympathetic activity constricts the renal arterioles,
reducing renal blood flow and diverting it to the heart and brain.
Several hormones act on the renal circulation: angiotensin two constricts,
preferentially the efferent arteriole,
helping to maintain filtration when flow is threatened;
the catecholamines constrict; while vasodilators such as prostaglandins,
nitric oxide and natriuretic peptides oppose these and protect the renal flow.
In anaesthesia and surgery, the combination of the stress response, hypovolaemia,
hypotension, positive-pressure ventilation and nephrotoxic insults can reduce renal
blood flow and predispose to acute kidney injury,
so the maintenance of an adequate circulating volume and blood pressure,
and the avoidance of nephrotoxins, are important for renal protection.
So renal blood flow, though autoregulated,
is reduced by sympathetic activity and vasoconstrictor hormones in stress,
haemorrhage and surgery, opposed by protective vasodilators; in anaesthesia,
the stress response, hypovolaemia and hypotension can reduce it and cause acute
kidney injury — making the maintenance of volume and pressure central to renal
protection.
Pull it together: how is the renal circulation adapted to the kidney's function?
I would draw it together around the renal circulation as a system adapted to
deliver a very large flow to the kidney for filtration,
while controlling and protecting that filtration.
The kidney receives a fifth to a quarter of the cardiac output,
far beyond its metabolic need, because this flow serves the filtration of the
plasma rather than oxygen supply.
The blood passes through two capillary beds in series — the high-pressure
glomerular for filtration and the low-pressure peritubular and vasa recta for
reabsorption — separated by the efferent arteriole, so that the two arterioles,
by their resistance, control the glomerular pressure and the filtration.
The flow and filtration are autoregulated,
held constant over a wide pressure range by the myogenic mechanism and
tubuloglomerular feedback, protecting them from fluctuations in pressure;
and the juxtaglomerular apparatus links the tubule,
the arterioles and the systemic blood pressure through tubuloglomerular feedback
and renin.
The uneven distribution favours the cortex, leaving the medulla vulnerable.
Neural and hormonal influences override autoregulation in stress.
So the renal circulation delivers a large flow for filtration through two serial
capillary beds controlled by the arterioles,
autoregulated and linked to systemic regulation through the juxtaglomerular
apparatus, with a cortical distribution that leaves the medulla vulnerable — an
adaptation central to renal function and to its failure.
Define the filtration fraction and explain its significance.
The filtration fraction is the proportion of the plasma flowing through the kidney
that is filtered at the glomerulus,
and it is a useful concept linking the renal plasma flow and the glomerular
filtration rate, and reflecting the balance of the arteriolar resistances.
It is defined as the glomerular filtration rate divided by the renal plasma flow;
with a filtration rate of around a hundred and twenty millilitres a minute and a
renal plasma flow of around six hundred,
the filtration fraction is about a fifth — so about a fifth of the plasma passing
through the glomerulus is filtered, the rest passing on into the efferent arteriole.
Its significance is twofold. It reflects the balance of the afferent and efferent
arteriolar tone: constriction of the efferent arteriole, for instance,
raises the glomerular pressure and filtration while reducing flow,
so it increases the filtration fraction.
And it determines the protein concentration, and so the oncotic pressure,
of the blood entering the peritubular capillaries,
which influences the reabsorption of fluid in the proximal tubule — a higher
filtration fraction raising the peritubular oncotic pressure and favouring
reabsorption.
So the filtration fraction is the proportion of renal plasma flow that is filtered,
normally about a fifth, given by the filtration rate over the plasma flow;
it reflects the balance of afferent and efferent arteriolar tone,
rising with efferent constriction, and influences proximal reabsorption through the
peritubular oncotic pressure — a concept linking flow, filtration and reabsorption.
Describe the effects of constricting the afferent versus the efferent arteriole.
The glomerular filtration is uniquely controlled by two arterioles,
one on each side of the glomerular capillary,
and constricting the afferent or the efferent arteriole has different,
and instructively opposite, effects on the renal blood flow and the filtration rate
— a key concept in understanding renal haemodynamics and the action of drugs.
Constricting the afferent arteriole, upstream of the glomerulus,
reduces the blood flow into the glomerulus and lowers the glomerular capillary
pressure, so it reduces both the renal blood flow and the glomerular filtration
rate.
Constricting the efferent arteriole, downstream, also reduces the renal blood flow,
by adding resistance; but, by impeding the outflow from the glomerulus,
it raises the glomerular capillary pressure, so it tends to increase,
or at least maintain, the filtration rate — so efferent constriction reduces flow
but supports filtration, raising the filtration fraction.
This is physiologically important: angiotensin two preferentially constricts the
efferent arteriole, which is how it maintains the filtration rate when the renal
perfusion is threatened, as in hypovolaemia;
and it explains why angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors,
by removing this efferent tone, can reduce the filtration rate in such states.
So constricting the afferent arteriole reduces both renal blood flow and
filtration, while constricting the efferent arteriole reduces flow but raises
glomerular pressure and so supports filtration;
angiotensin two using efferent constriction to maintain filtration when perfusion
is threatened — a control whose disturbance by inhibitors of angiotensin is
clinically important.
Describe the oxygenation of the kidney and the vulnerability of the medulla.
Although the kidney as a whole receives a very large blood flow,
its oxygenation is paradoxically precarious in the medulla,
and understanding this explains the kidney's vulnerability to ischaemic injury,
particularly in the perioperative period.
The cortex, receiving the great majority of the renal blood flow,
is well oxygenated.
The medulla, however, is in a different situation:
it receives only a small fraction of the renal blood flow — deliberately low,
because a high flow would wash out the concentration gradient on which urine
concentration depends — yet it has a high metabolic demand,
because the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle is engaged in vigorous active
transport of sodium, consuming oxygen.
The combination of a low blood flow and a high oxygen consumption means that the
medulla normally operates at a low oxygen tension,
close to the threshold of hypoxia.
Furthermore, the countercurrent arrangement of the vasa recta,
which preserves the gradient, also allows oxygen to be shunted from the descending
to the ascending vessels, lowering the medullary oxygen further.
So any reduction in renal perfusion readily tips the medulla into hypoxia and
injury.
So the renal cortex is well oxygenated, but the medulla,
receiving a deliberately low blood flow yet having a high oxygen demand from the
active transport of the thick ascending limb,
with countercurrent oxygen shunting in the vasa recta,
operates near hypoxia — making it especially vulnerable to ischaemic injury when
perfusion falls, the basis of acute tubular necrosis.
Describe the role of prostaglandins in the renal circulation and the effect of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
The renal prostaglandins are locally-produced vasodilators that play an important
protective role in the renal circulation, particularly when it is under threat,
and their inhibition by the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs has significant
renal consequences.
In the normal, unstressed kidney, the prostaglandins have only a minor influence on
the renal blood flow.
But when the kidney is subjected to vasoconstrictor influences — as in
hypovolaemia, hypotension, heart failure,
or high circulating levels of angiotensin two and catecholamines — the production
of vasodilator prostaglandins is increased,
and they act to oppose the vasoconstriction,
dilating the renal vessels and preserving the renal blood flow and the filtration;
so they protect the kidney in states of threatened perfusion.
The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme that
produces the prostaglandins; in the healthy,
well-perfused kidney this has little effect,
but in the kidney that depends on prostaglandins to maintain its perfusion — the
hypovolaemic, hypotensive or heart-failure patient — their removal allows unopposed
vasoconstriction, reducing renal blood flow and filtration and risking acute kidney
injury.
So the renal prostaglandins are protective vasodilators,
produced in increased amounts when the renal circulation is threatened by
vasoconstrictors, preserving renal blood flow and filtration;
the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, by inhibiting them,
can precipitate renal injury in the volume-depleted or hypotensive patient — an
important perioperative consideration in their use.
Describe the renal response to haemorrhage or hypovolaemia.
The renal response to haemorrhage or hypovolaemia illustrates how the kidney both
protects itself and contributes to the defence of the circulation,
integrating its own autoregulation with the systemic responses.
When the circulating volume falls, the kidney is affected in several ways.
The fall in arterial pressure is initially buffered by autoregulation,
which maintains the renal blood flow and filtration over a range.
But as the hypovolaemia becomes more severe, the systemic responses override this:
the increased sympathetic activity constricts the renal arterioles,
reducing renal blood flow and diverting blood to the heart and brain;
the renin-angiotensin system is activated,
angiotensin two constricting the efferent arteriole to maintain filtration as long
as possible and promoting sodium reabsorption;
and antidiuretic hormone is released, promoting water reabsorption.
The result is a marked reduction in renal blood flow with relative preservation of
filtration at first, and the production of a small volume of concentrated,
sodium-poor urine, as the kidney conserves salt and water to support the
circulating volume.
If the hypovolaemia is severe or prolonged,
the renal blood flow falls enough to cause ischaemic injury — acute tubular
necrosis.
So in haemorrhage the kidney first maintains filtration by autoregulation, then,
as hypovolaemia worsens, undergoes sympathetic and angiotensin-mediated
vasoconstriction with efferent preservation of filtration and
antidiuretic-hormone-driven water retention,
producing concentrated sodium-poor urine to defend the circulation;
severe or prolonged hypovolaemia causing ischaemic acute tubular necrosis — the
kidney both defending the circulation and being endangered by it.
Distinguish the cortical and juxtamedullary nephrons.
The nephrons are not all alike, but fall into two main types — the cortical and the
juxtamedullary — which differ in their position and structure,
and this difference is functionally important,
particularly for the concentration of urine.
The cortical nephrons, which are the majority,
have their glomeruli in the outer cortex and have relatively short loops of Henle
that dip only a little way into the medulla, or not at all;
they are concerned chiefly with the routine reabsorption and excretion of solutes
and water, and their peritubular capillaries surround the cortical tubules.
The juxtamedullary nephrons, fewer in number,
have their glomeruli deep in the cortex near the medulla,
and — importantly — have long loops of Henle that descend deep into the inner
medulla; their efferent arterioles give rise to the vasa recta, the long,
hairpin vessels that accompany the loops into the medulla.
These juxtamedullary nephrons, with their long loops and the vasa recta,
are responsible for generating and maintaining the medullary concentration gradient
by the countercurrent mechanism, and so for the ability to concentrate the urine.
So the cortical nephrons, the majority,
have short loops and handle routine reabsorption,
while the juxtamedullary nephrons, fewer,
have long loops descending deep into the medulla with accompanying vasa recta,
and are responsible for generating the medullary concentration gradient and the
ability to concentrate the urine — a structural division underlying the kidney's
concentrating function.
Describe the influence of ageing on renal function.
Renal function declines with age, through structural and functional changes,
and this decline is important in anaesthesia,
because the elderly have a reduced renal reserve and handle fluids and drugs
differently.
With ageing, there is a progressive loss of functioning nephrons and of renal mass,
particularly in the cortex, with a fall in the number of glomeruli and sclerosis of
others.
The renal blood flow declines, and the glomerular filtration rate falls
progressively from middle age onwards.
Importantly, this fall in filtration rate may not be reflected in a raised plasma
creatinine, because the muscle mass, and so the creatinine production,
also falls with age — so a normal creatinine in an elderly person may conceal a
significantly reduced filtration rate, a trap in drug dosing.
The ageing kidney also has a reduced ability to concentrate and to dilute the
urine, and to conserve or excrete sodium,
so the elderly are more vulnerable to both dehydration and fluid overload,
and to electrolyte disturbance; and the renally-excreted drugs are cleared more
slowly.
So ageing causes a loss of nephrons and renal mass,
a falling renal blood flow and filtration rate — which may be masked by the reduced
creatinine production — and impaired concentration, dilution and sodium handling;
so the elderly have reduced renal reserve,
are vulnerable to fluid and electrolyte disturbance,
and clear renally-excreted drugs more slowly,
all important considerations in their anaesthesia.
Describe how the glomerular filtration rate is maintained when renal perfusion
falls, and the effect of inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system.
When the renal perfusion pressure or flow falls,
the glomerular filtration rate is defended by mechanisms acting on the arterioles,
and the dependence of this defence on angiotensin two explains an important effect
of the drugs that block the renin-angiotensin system.
As the perfusion falls, two things maintain the filtration.
First, autoregulation: the myogenic and tubuloglomerular feedback mechanisms dilate
the afferent arteriole, maintaining the glomerular pressure over a range of falling
pressures.
Second, and important when perfusion falls further, angiotensin two,
generated by the activated renin-angiotensin system,
preferentially constricts the efferent arteriole,
which raises the glomerular capillary pressure and so maintains the filtration rate
despite the reduced flow.
This efferent constriction is a key defence of filtration in states of reduced
renal perfusion, such as renal artery stenosis, hypovolaemia and heart failure.
Consequently, the drugs that block this system — the angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors and the angiotensin receptor blockers — by removing the efferent
constriction, can cause the filtration rate to fall, sometimes precipitously,
in patients who depend on it, such as those with renal artery stenosis or marked
hypovolaemia.
So the glomerular filtration rate is maintained when perfusion falls by
autoregulatory dilatation of the afferent arteriole and by angiotensin-two-mediated
constriction of the efferent arteriole, which raises glomerular pressure;
so inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system can reduce the filtration rate in
patients who depend on this efferent tone — an important consideration in their
perioperative use.
Describe the renal nerves and the effect of renal sympathetic activity.
The kidney is richly innervated by sympathetic nerves,
which influence its function in several ways,
and an understanding of this is important because renal sympathetic activity is
increased in many of the states encountered in anaesthesia.
The renal nerves are predominantly sympathetic, and they innervate three targets:
the arterioles, the tubules, and the juxtaglomerular cells.
Their effects, when activity increases, are correspondingly threefold.
On the arterioles, sympathetic activity causes vasoconstriction,
reducing the renal blood flow and, at higher levels,
the glomerular filtration rate, by constricting both afferent and efferent
arterioles.
On the tubules, sympathetic activity directly stimulates sodium reabsorption,
promoting sodium retention. On the juxtaglomerular cells,
it stimulates the release of renin,
activating the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
So increased renal sympathetic activity reduces renal blood flow, retains sodium,
and activates the renin-angiotensin system — a coordinated antidiuretic,
antinatriuretic and volume-conserving response,
appropriate to states such as haemorrhage and exercise but potentially harmful when
sustained, as in heart failure and the surgical stress response.
So the renal nerves are sympathetic and act on the arterioles,
the tubules and the juxtaglomerular cells:
increased activity causing vasoconstriction with reduced flow and filtration,
direct stimulation of sodium reabsorption,
and the release of renin — a volume-conserving response activated in haemorrhage,
exercise and surgical stress, contributing to the sodium and water retention of
these states.
Describe the role of dopamine in the renal circulation.
Dopamine has effects on the kidney that have attracted much interest,
particularly the former hope that it might protect the kidney,
and although that hope has not been realised,
its renal actions are worth understanding.
Dopamine acts on specific dopamine receptors in the kidney,
and it is also produced locally within the kidney,
where it acts as a paracrine natriuretic agent.
At low doses, dopamine stimulates the renal dopamine receptors,
causing renal vasodilatation, increasing renal blood flow,
and inhibiting tubular sodium reabsorption, so promoting a natriuresis and diuresis.
This combination led to the widespread former use of so-called renal-dose dopamine,
given at low infusion rates in the hope of protecting the kidney or preventing
acute kidney injury in critically ill and surgical patients.
However, controlled trials have shown that low-dose dopamine does not prevent acute
kidney injury or improve renal outcomes;
the increase in urine output it produces does not reflect protection of the kidney,
and it has potential harms.
So its use for renal protection has been abandoned.
The related agent fenoldopam, a selective dopamine-receptor agonist,
has been studied similarly.
So dopamine, acting on renal dopamine receptors, causes renal vasodilatation,
increased flow and a natriuresis, which led to the former use of low-dose dopamine
for renal protection; but this has been shown not to prevent acute kidney injury
and has been abandoned — an instructive example of a plausible renal intervention
disproved by evidence, the increase in urine output not reflecting genuine
protection.
Describe the effects of positive-pressure ventilation and PEEP on renal function.
Positive-pressure ventilation, and particularly the application of positive
end-expiratory pressure, affects renal function,
an effect important in the ventilated patient,
in whom it can contribute to fluid retention and reduced urine output.
The effects are mediated chiefly through the circulation and the neurohormonal
responses.
Positive-pressure ventilation raises the intrathoracic pressure,
which reduces the venous return and so the cardiac output,
tending to reduce the renal blood flow and filtration;
positive end-expiratory pressure accentuates this.
The fall in cardiac output and arterial pressure,
and the reduced stretch of the cardiac and arterial volume receptors — which now
sense an apparently reduced filling — trigger the volume-conserving responses:
increased sympathetic activity, activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system, and the release of antidiuretic hormone; in addition,
the reduced atrial stretch lowers the release of atrial natriuretic peptide.
The combined effect is a reduction in renal blood flow and filtration and an
increase in sodium and water retention,
with a fall in urine output — contributing to the fluid retention often seen in
ventilated patients.
So positive-pressure ventilation and positive end-expiratory pressure reduce renal
blood flow and filtration by lowering cardiac output through the raised
intrathoracic pressure, and promote sodium and water retention by activating the
sympathetic, renin-angiotensin and antidiuretic-hormone systems and reducing atrial
natriuretic peptide — contributing to the reduced urine output and fluid retention
of the ventilated patient, an important consideration in critical care.
Describe the cardiorenal interaction and renal venous congestion.
The function of the kidney depends not only on its arterial perfusion but on its
venous drainage, and the importance of renal venous congestion,
increasingly recognised, explains part of the renal dysfunction in heart failure
and fluid overload — the cardiorenal interaction.
The renal blood flow, and so the glomerular filtration,
depends on the pressure gradient across the kidney — the difference between the
arterial pressure driving flow in and the venous pressure it must overcome to drain
out.
Traditionally, attention focused on the arterial side,
but it is now appreciated that a raised renal venous pressure — as occurs in right
heart failure, in fluid overload, and with a raised intra-abdominal pressure —
impairs renal function by reducing this gradient and raising the pressure within
the encapsulated kidney, reducing the net filtration and congesting the kidney.
This venous congestion may be as important as the reduction in arterial flow in the
renal dysfunction of heart failure.
The recognition of this has implications: in the congested,
fluid-overloaded patient with renal dysfunction,
relieving the congestion by removing fluid may improve renal function,
whereas giving more fluid may worsen it — contrary to the instinct to give fluid
for oliguria.
So renal function depends on the pressure gradient across the kidney,
and a raised renal venous pressure — from right heart failure, fluid overload,
or raised intra-abdominal pressure — congests the kidney and impairs filtration,
perhaps as much as reduced arterial flow; so relieving congestion,
rather than giving fluid, may improve renal function in the overloaded patient —
the cardiorenal interaction, an important modern understanding.
Describe the effects of the anaesthetic agents on renal blood flow and function.
The anaesthetic agents themselves affect renal blood flow and function,
generally tending to reduce them, an effect that is usually transient and
reversible but contributes to the perioperative reduction in renal function.
The effects are partly direct and partly indirect.
Most general anaesthetic agents tend to reduce the renal blood flow and the
glomerular filtration rate to some degree, chiefly indirectly,
through their effects on the systemic circulation — reducing the arterial pressure
and the cardiac output — and through the neurohormonal stress response,
rather than by a major direct renal action;
these effects are largely reversible on recovery.
The regional anaesthetic techniques,
by reducing the blood pressure through sympathetic blockade,
can also reduce renal perfusion if hypotension is marked.
A specific concern attaches to certain volatile agents:
the metabolism of some fluorinated volatile agents releases fluoride ions,
which were associated, with the now-obsolete methoxyflurane, with a nephrotoxic,
high-output renal failure; modern agents such as sevoflurane release less fluoride
and are not clinically nephrotoxic in normal use,
though the compound A produced by sevoflurane in low-flow circuits with certain
absorbents has been a theoretical concern, not borne out as clinically significant.
So the anaesthetic agents tend to reduce renal blood flow and filtration,
chiefly indirectly through reduced blood pressure and cardiac output and the stress
response, reversibly; regional techniques reducing perfusion if hypotension is
marked; and, historically, the fluoride from methoxyflurane causing nephrotoxicity,
though modern volatiles such as sevoflurane are not clinically nephrotoxic in
normal use — effects contributing to, but not usually the main cause of,
perioperative renal impairment.
Describe the renal handling of water and solute in sepsis.
Sepsis is a common and important cause of acute kidney injury,
and the renal changes in sepsis are complex and not fully explained by simple
hypoperfusion, an understanding of which is relevant to the critically ill.
Classically, the acute kidney injury of sepsis was attributed to renal ischaemia
from hypotension and reduced renal blood flow.
While hypoperfusion does occur, particularly with the hypotension and reduced
cardiac output of severe sepsis, it is now recognised that septic acute kidney
injury can occur even when the renal blood flow is maintained or increased,
so other mechanisms are important.
These include: the effects of the inflammatory mediators and the systemic
inflammatory response on the kidney,
causing injury and dysfunction at the cellular level;
disturbances of the renal microcirculation,
with maldistribution of flow despite an adequate total flow;
the effects of endothelial dysfunction;
and the tubular response to the inflammatory and other signals.
The result is a fall in glomerular filtration and tubular dysfunction,
often with relatively preserved blood flow — a different picture from the simple
ischaemic acute tubular necrosis. The management rests on treating the sepsis,
restoring the circulation, and supportive care.
So the acute kidney injury of sepsis, formerly attributed simply to ischaemia,
is now understood to result also from inflammatory injury,
microcirculatory disturbance and endothelial dysfunction,
often with preserved or increased total renal blood flow — a complex picture beyond
simple hypoperfusion, central to the renal dysfunction of the critically ill and
important to its management.
Describe contrast-induced nephropathy and its prevention.
Contrast-induced nephropathy, the acute kidney injury that can follow the
administration of iodinated radiographic contrast media,
is a recognised cause of renal injury in patients undergoing investigations and
procedures, and its understanding allows its prevention in those at risk.
It is an acute deterioration in renal function occurring within a few days of
receiving iodinated contrast, attributed to a combination of mechanisms:
a direct toxic effect of the contrast on the tubular cells,
and renal vasoconstriction reducing the medullary blood flow and causing medullary
ischaemia, to which, as we have noted, the medulla is vulnerable.
The risk is greatest in those with pre-existing renal impairment,
particularly diabetic nephropathy, and in the volume-depleted,
and rises with the dose of contrast.
Its prevention, in those at risk, rests chiefly on ensuring an adequate hydration
and circulating volume around the time of the contrast,
which maintains the renal and medullary perfusion and dilutes the contrast —
intravenous fluid being the mainstay;
on minimising the dose of contrast and using lower-toxicity agents;
and on avoiding other nephrotoxins and, where possible,
withholding drugs such as the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs around the time.
So contrast-induced nephropathy is an acute kidney injury after iodinated contrast,
from direct tubular toxicity and medullary ischaemic vasoconstriction,
the risk greatest in pre-existing renal impairment and volume depletion;
prevented chiefly by adequate hydration to maintain perfusion,
by minimising the contrast dose, and by avoiding other nephrotoxins — a preventable
cause of renal injury in those undergoing contrast studies.
Describe the hepatorenal syndrome.
The hepatorenal syndrome is a particular form of renal failure that occurs in
advanced liver disease, in which the kidneys fail despite being structurally
normal, and it is an instructive and serious condition illustrating the dependence
of renal function on the systemic circulation.
It occurs in patients with severe liver disease and portal hypertension,
typically with cirrhosis and ascites.
The mechanism is circulatory: the liver disease and portal hypertension cause a
marked splanchnic and systemic vasodilatation,
which reduces the effective arterial blood volume;
this is sensed as a fall in the effective circulating volume,
triggering an intense activation of the renin-angiotensin system,
the sympathetic nervous system and antidiuretic hormone,
which cause a severe renal vasoconstriction.
The result is a profound reduction in renal blood flow and glomerular filtration —
a functional renal failure — even though the kidneys themselves are structurally
normal, as shown by the fact that they can function normally if transplanted into a
recipient with a normal circulation, or if the liver disease is reversed.
The urine is sodium-poor, as in pre-renal failure.
The prognosis is poor without treatment of the underlying liver disease,
definitively by liver transplantation.
So the hepatorenal syndrome is a functional renal failure in advanced liver
disease, in which splanchnic and systemic vasodilatation reduces the effective
arterial volume, triggering intense renal vasoconstriction through the
renin-angiotensin, sympathetic and antidiuretic-hormone systems — the structurally
normal kidneys failing from the circulatory disturbance;
reversible with the liver disease and definitively treated by liver
transplantation, a serious illustration of the dependence of the kidney on the
systemic circulation.
Thank you. A clear account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The kidney excretes metabolic wastes,
regulates water/electrolyte and acid-base balance and (long-term) blood pressure,
and has endocrine functions (erythropoietin, vitamin D activation, renin);
the Second, The renal circulation receives a fifth to a quarter of cardiac output
(~1200 mL/min), far beyond metabolic need (it serves filtration),
arranged uniquely as two capillary beds in series — high-pressure glomerular
(filtration) and low-pressure peritubular/vasa recta (reabsorption) — separated by
the efferent arteriole; the two arterioles control glomerular pressure and
filtration.
Third, Flow is distributed unevenly:
the cortex receives most (suited to filtration);
the medulla only a few per cent — necessary to preserve its concentration gradient
but leaving it on the edge of hypoxia and vulnerable to ischaemic injury.
Fourth, Renal blood flow and GFR are autoregulated,
held nearly constant over a mean arterial pressure of ~80-180 mmHg,
by the myogenic response (afferent arteriole constricts to a rise in pressure) and
tubuloglomerular feedback (macula densa).
The juxtaglomerular apparatus — macula densa (senses tubular NaCl),
renin-secreting JG cells (afferent arteriole, sense pressure),
mesangial cells — mediates tubuloglomerular feedback and renin control.
Fifth, Renal blood flow is measured by PAH clearance (almost completely cleared in
one passage → clearance = renal plasma flow by the Fick principle),
converted to blood flow via the haematocrit.
Though autoregulated, flow is reduced by sympathetic activity and vasoconstrictors
(angiotensin II, catecholamines) in stress/haemorrhage/surgery — so maintaining
volume and blood pressure and avoiding nephrotoxins are central to perioperative
renal protection.
Thank you. That concludes the station.